so the first thing that we've got to
figure out is like why do people lie and
if we want to understand when people are
lying we have to start by figuring out
why do people lie so what is lying about
so sometimes you know people say lying
is about protection because you're you
know you're trying to protect yourself
from a particular consequence and that's
fair I think but in my opinion lying is
really about one thing and that's about
control so what any time someone tells a
lie they're actually trying to control
the behavior of another human being
right so let's just think about this if
I if someone asks me oh did you steal
candy from the candy jar and then like I
can say yes and then the human being
will react a certain way or I can say no
and they'll react a different way so if
we think about why do I lie it's to
change the reaction of another human
being and literally what it is it's
about controlling
another human being okay this is why
people lie it's all about control and
even when we lie to ourselves that too
is about control because we're trying to
protect ourselves or control a
particular opinion that we have about
ourselves and we can maybe get into that
later if you guys want to but the first
thing that you guys have to understand
is that lying is about control and what
we're trying to do is control the
actions of another human being so then
we have to think a little bit about you
know how do we know if someone is going
to lie and so that a couple of things
that we have to think about one is you
know what's at stake so
consequences
you
and then secondly what is this person's
threshold for dealing with consequences
is
you
and this is for consequences okay so
these are actually I think the most
important things right here because if
you can understand these two pieces why
isn't this capturing
you guys see this we'll see if we can
get this running again but I can just
tell you guys so basically well let's
just think about lying right so people
lie to control consequences and if you
think about it like you know you're
lying to create a particular outcome
so the questions that you need to ask
yourself when you're trying to tell if
somebody is lying is first of all what's
the consequence if they lie and the
higher the consequences the more that
they're they need to control your
behavior because that's really what it's
about right it's about them saying words
that control your reaction and so you
need to stop thinking about you know
does this person is you know what's the
percentage chances of telling the truth
is a true untrue forget all about all
that the question that you need to ask
yourself is does this person have a
vested interest in controlling my
behavior and if they have a vested
interest in controlling your behavior
they are far more likely apply the
second thing to understand about the
person is how comfortable are they with
the consequences of their actions so
some people and we can kind of think
about this a little bit like integrity
but you know some people are comfortable
with the consequences of their actions
like if they you know if they [ __ ] up
and they're okay with standing being
[ __ ] up like they're okay like telling
other people like you know yeah I made a
mistake if you want to fire me go ahead
and fire me it's not that big of a deal
like I understand I deserve to be fired
go ahead and fire me and then other
people are paranoid about getting fired
so some people are more comfortable
accepting the consequences of their
actions and other people are like less
comfortable accepting the consequences
of their actions and so if someone if
someone is demonstrated to you that
they're comfortable accepting the
consequences of their actions and we can
call that integrity but I think like
integrity is like hard to measure so
it's like literally what does this
person when they make mistakes do they
actually own up to them and do they
accept the consequences of their
mistakes or do they not and so if
someone accepts the consequences of
their actions
then you know they're less likely to lie
because in a sense they've got thicker
skin so if I'm willing to get hit or get
hurt or get you know yelled at by
someone else I don't need to control
them because the consequence of them
yelling at me is something that I can
withstand so in a sense like the more
people can withstand the consequences of
actions the less likely they are to lie
and the less likely that they are to
control you because they don't need to
control you because it doesn't you know
they can survive if you get mad at them
and so there's nothing about like so I
think these are really basically the two
things which is you know what it does
does this person need to control me with
their words like that's the question
that you need to ask yourself right so
I'll give you guys a couple of examples
so I work with people who have addiction
problems right so they've frequently
lied and even though they're good people
and they try to live honest lives and
all that kind of stuff like they're not
liars there aren't like liars and not
Liars right that's kind of a big problem
is that people think about people like
some people have integrity and other
people don't have integrity and some
people are liars and and not liars
so the issue is all about consequences
so like if I have someone who you know
is addicted to opiates and has ADHD we
just have to think a little bit about
like okay like does this person need to
lie to me about what they're using in
order to continue to get adderall out of
me and if the answer is yes then oddly
enough I sort of presume that they're
lying until I get concrete evidence that
they're not right so it's like they're
gonna lie to get what they need out me
so then the issue is how do you work
with someone who has an opiate problem
and needs at all so I can try to like
control them in return but really what I
want to do is create a safe space right
and this is why I really need to be able
to draw this [ __ ] because this is hard
to explain
you
okay try this again
okay work say so now I want to show you
guys something okay
okay oh god I miss painted so much worse
so
so people lie because the consequence is
high right so high consequence
is going to increase the chance of lying
right and then low consequence
is going to decrease once I saved yo
what's up what's going on III thought ID
change change changed saved this is
right right yeah this is good meet
yourself meet yourself kid
okay alright so this is working right
say it okay so so the question is if we
want to control like if we want to catch
people in lying if they have a high
consequence then they're going to lie
and if they have a low consequence then
they're going to tell the truth
okay so the question is like then the
other thing here is that you know the
more the more tough or more resilient
they are against consequences the less
likely they are to lie so the question
is if you're dealing with someone who
may be lying how do you move from here
to here right so how can you is the
person who someone may be lying to go
from a high consequence place to a low
consequence place and this is safety
okay so if you're trying to get someone
to not lie to you what you have to do is
make it safe for them to tell you the
truth and this is really really tricky
right because when you make it safe for
them to tell the truth you're lowering
the consequence of their line which in
turn means that they don't need to lie
to you anymore so I'll tell I'll give
you guys an example so I'll tell someone
I'll be like hey man so like I know that
you need adderall for me and you know
I'm concerned that you're using opiates
again because you know you've been like
canceling appointments and things like
that and like I know that a lot of times
people who slip up with their opiates
prescribers sort of say like I'm not
gonna prescribe you any controlled
substances but that's not true I mean
you have a diagnosis of ADHD and if you
need your adderall that's okay but we
got to figure out like you got to
understand just think about this for a
second it's not like I'm never gonna
prescribe you at all again it's just I
don't want to keep on prescribing you
adderall
if you're using opiates because the
whole purpose of the adderall is so that
you can work well right like that's why
we give you the medication so that you
can do a good job and if you're using
again like you're not going to be doing
a good job so it's kind of like you're
missing the point man I'm like they're
not interested in punishing you and
taking away you're at all what I'm
interested in doing is like the Averell
is there for a particular goal and I'm
afraid that you're not meeting that goal
that has nothing duty at all it's
because you're [ __ ] using again so
like we got to fix that man and when you
say something like that and you kind of
let them know you know like it's not
like I'm just just gonna take away your
at all I may stop prescribing it and
sometimes I'll even tell them I'll be
like I'm not comfortable prescribing you
a dural you know unless I'm like assured
that you're kind of doing okay with the
Oh pious and the interesting thing is
that when I say something like that I'm
actually creating the consequence that
they don't want without them even saying
anything like I'm taking I'm like
threatening to sort of take the outer
all away and so oddly enough it's sort
of like you know if using
adderall okay and if not using so I'm
going to just change colors here inside
right so basically what I'm doing is I'm
saying that it doesn't matter what
you're doing because the consequences
can be the same if I'm worried about you
I'm going to stop prescribing alcohol so
the point here is that we're not
changing which we're changing we're
decreasing our consequences because if
I'm not gonna prescribe adderall anyway
then like he doesn't need the light
right where she does this make sense
I need a kind of check in with chat for
a second you guys following this okay so
like this is exactly what I'm saying is
that if you want to understand lying
you've just got to think about
consequences and think about like under
what circumstances would this person lie
does this person need to control me and
if you want to get the truth out of
someone you've got to just think about
okay how can I create a safe space for
them to tell me the truth or how do i
impose the consequence even without them
like lying and the funny thing this is
the cool thing is that when you do that
then people just tell you the truth
because they're like you know [ __ ] it if
you're not gonna prescribe the adderall
like like I'm using opiates like please
don't stop prescribing at all I really
am using opiates like that's actually
what they say like they come clean then
in there when you're like yeah man I
don't know what's going on it just seems
like you're not able to keep your [ __ ]
together
I'm not sure like I know you say you're
not using anymore but I just don't feel
comfortable prescribing at all and
they're like I am using opiates and when
you say it like that it sort of switches
it around right and then it's like then
it's like okay man like well let's work
on that and then then then what you do
if you want to work with people who are
lying is that you reward good behavior
right so then I say okay let's let's get
Chico sober like why don't you go into
rehab for a while and then like once
you're done with rehab like if you can
stay clean for two weeks I'll prescribe
you're at all again and and then they're
like okay great so like this is also
this comes so do you guys see when
someone comes clean to you and you don't
punish them for it what you're doing is
going back to creating safety so this is
the
key thing so I guess you know I guess
this talk was supposed to be how to
detect someone's line but I guess really
what it's turning into is how to get
people to stop lying to you and the way
that you get people to stop lying to you
is you create unlike an area of safety
where you kind of say look you know
let's use another example where you know
you're afraid that someone is cheating
on you so that's a very common and then
you once again you got to think through
like what are the consequences if this
person is cheating on me like are they
financially dependent on me do they live
with me do I support them if all of
those things are true then the
likelihood for them to lie is way higher
and then you know because the
consequences of like them coming clean
if they're afraid that you're gonna
break up with them or something like
that and then like those consequences
are really really high so then you have
to be like extra careful because they
have a big big incentive the cost to
them being caught in their lie is very
very high so they're going to do
everything that they can to keep you to
control your behavior to not break up
with them and so oddly enough if you're
in that situation you know then the next
question that you have to ask yourself
is like is this person you know what's
their threshold right so what's their
damage resistance
right like how much how much can they
tank damage so when they screw up are
they people that have pretty high damage
resistance and they can like withstand
it like is this someone who even if they
you know are financially dependent on me
like you know they're the kind of person
that if I kicked him out the door like
they recognize that that's fair and that
they can handle it and they'll be okay
because if they're damaged resistance is
high then they're less likely to lie and
then kind of the the third kind of thing
to think about is how can you create a
safe space right so like if so if you're
concerned that your partner is cheating
on you you can just sort of say like
look so and now what we're gonna do is
trust not so I'll show you guys like the
Keating example okay so let's talk about
cheating so the issue with cheating is
that if cheating
rust right if not cheating so then what
we do so like normally the way that we
look at it is this right if cheating no
trust and if not cheating trust so what
do we do if you want to talk to this
person and get them to come clean I
guess what this is really turning into
is how to manipulate Liars this is what
you have to do so how do you do that so
what you say is look I'm concerned that
you're cheating on me and there are a
couple of things like I saw some
disturbing text messages on your phone
and and like basically I find myself
like not trusting you and I I know that
you say you're not doing anything but
like I'm really really having difficulty
trusting you and even if you are
cheating like what would feel better to
me is like what I want from you is
honest like I don't really care about
whether you're cheating or not but what
I really want is honesty and because if
you are cheating like I value our
relationship and if you're you know if
you regret it then like I think we
should try to move past it and we can
try to work past it but I need to know
one way or the other right like I just
don't want to be lied to and we can
think about how to move forward because
everyone makes mistakes and then just
tell me if it's going on because like
I'm worried about it and I find it like
it's hard for me to trust you right now
and so what you're trying to do there is
like you're creating even though you're
knocking off trust you're increasing the
safety of the space
right you're giving them a chance you're
kind of saying like I want you to come
clean and even if you come clean it
doesn't mean that things are over
between us
and so what often times what people say
is they'll say like Oh like you know if
you're cheating on me [ __ ] you your mom
[ __ ] done with you I'm done with you
for the rest of your life this and this
and this and people say that [ __ ] but
what they don't realize is all you're
doing is incentivizing that person to
lie to your face like sure it feels good
to say that and then what happens is
they say yeah I really am cheating on
you and then you stay calm for a little
while and you say like okay how long has
it been going on and you kind of try to
control your emotions a little bit and
then like you know you talk about it for
like a day or two and then you decide
where you are with that can you forgive
them if you can't forget because you
don't need to forget them then what you
do is you kick their ass to the curb
you're like yeah I want you to move out
by the end of the week I don't think I
can like like I don't know if I can come
back from this or not I really
appreciate your honesty and then your
[ __ ] kick them to the curb right you
create a safe space then you stab them
in the back because they [ __ ] you and
that's not fair but and sometimes I'll
you know I think you should give it a
fair shot and I got to see chance
reaction when I say that because I'm
just trying to figure out you know but
seriously like that that's how it is
right like let's be honest like you you
want to be honest with them and then you
got to kind of let them know like you
give it a fair shot and then if you
can't be aunt like if you can't forgive
them then you can't forgive them and
then yeah you send them out the door and
is it that manipulative absolutely it's
absolutely human if you live it because
it [ __ ] line to you doesn't like what
what you're just going to take it laying
that and and and so like you know I
think like if someone does you wrong
then you know you could like I don't
know
right it's not it's not gender dependent
by the way guys like I said kick them to
the curb right so a lot of deadbeat
dudes that that cheat on their
girlfriends and deadbeat dudes that
cheat on their boyfriends and deadbeat
girls that cheat on their girlfriends
it's like there's the whole spectrum
it's really not gender dependent but I
think the key thing here is is you know
you have to figure out like you have to
think about like who's being controlled
and how you're being controlled and
think about how to create a safe space
and I genuinely do think that you know
if you want a relationship to work and
there's been cheating that has gone on
you have to have honesty because the
whole point is if Trust is gone then the
relationship is dead from the inside
like that's not solvent I mean it's not
fixable if the trust is dying - trust is
dying and then you've got to kind of you
know you got to work from there like
it's not I don't think that that's
manipulative at all so I'm not saying
that you know if someone confesses to
you that they're cheating I think you
should really give that fair
consideration and think about what's
going on with your relationship no I
don't I don't think it's eye for an eye
at all like I don't think that helps
anything and the issue is like how do
you cuz think about for a second if
someone cheats on you that trust is dead
already so you have to build that trust
on and if you want to build that trust
off like you can't do it without honesty
right so I mean this is kind of tricky
but but that's kind of where it starts
and then if you can't build that trust
or you do need your space then I think
it's fine to break up with them like
when you when you're creating a safe
space you're not promising that you're
gonna be with them forever I think you
should be honest and what you're saying
is like I need a chance to move past
this and in order to do that what I need
from you is honesty which is absolutely
true and then you know be careful
because like if you don't really believe
that then I wouldn't recommend that you
lie to them but I think you should give
it a fair shot and kind of say like it's
interesting I had a conversation with my
wife about this and maybe you know it's
blending into relationship advice but we
talked a little bit about like you know
what of us had one an affair like what
would we do about it how would we handle
it and and she was a little bit
surprised by my answer and I was like I
would absolutely tell you if she was
like why I was like because I think it's
you have the right to decide whether you
stay in this relationship or not like
it's not my place to decide for you
whether you stay in this relationship
it's your choice anyway that's kind of
neither here nor there and so that's why
I think even if you have had an affair
like you should tell your partner if you
really care about them because if you
really care about them they deserve to
be with someone who hasn't had an affair
with them right and that may not be you
and so like just because it doesn't
serve like I just don't think like that
and yeah it's it's weird like I know
it's weird because like like it comes
down to like self-interest and control
then like I don't think it's my place to
control her decision about who she dates
it's her choice right and it's like my
job to try to make the relationship as
like positive for her as she can't as I
can and it's her job to make the
relationship is positive as she can for
me and that's that's how like the
relationship works okay but we kind of
got astray
so just to recap a little bit okay we're
gonna go back to this okay so just to
kind of recap how do you you know
how do you think about whether someone
is lying or not lying so the first thing
is that you've got to think about you
think about it as control and think
about does this person have a vested
interest to control me and if they have
a vested interest to control you your
antenna should be raised the second
thing is what is this person's damage
resistance how likely are they to face
their consequences this is the best way
to put it
are they no are they consequence
avoidant
okay and the more consequence avoidant
they are the more likely they are to lie
right and if we think about it like
gamers are really big liars and if we
think about like you know I remember
when you know my parents would call me
up when I was like 21 or 20 and they
would ask me how did class go today and
I said fine and that was a [ __ ] lie
cuz I didn't go to class but I was so
damn consequence avoidant like I was so
avoidant that there's no way I'm ever
gonna tell the truth because if I tell
them yeah it didn't go well then they
ask me why and then I have to answer and
then I have to tell them that I'm
playing games all day and I'm a piece of
[ __ ] and then I have to say those words
out loud and like all I want to do is
like not think about anything that I
just want to go back to like playing
Diablo and like not worry about any of
that [ __ ] so I'm very consequence
avoided
right and we see this in our population
where everyone makes these big bold
claims about how awesome they are at
life and how much they get laid and how
big their dick is and all this kind of
crap and that's all because their
consequence avoided so the equation is
kind of you know what's the consequence
how consequence avoided are they and
then that sort of gives you the general
idea of how likely they are to lie okay
so then you know high likelihood
the hood hello likelihood right so then
you kind of like in your mind you you
split people into two camps which camper
land high likelihood a little acre and
then there are a couple of clues that
you can kind of use but these are sort
of notorious so the first thing is like
you can't you know people talk about
like oh if someone looks up to the left
and looks up to the right like I think
all that crap is so imprecise that I
would not bet any amount of money on
like making that you know you can't make
a relationship decision based on whether
where someone's eyes go he's just a bad
way to navigate a relationship okay so
here's the first thing that you guys
need to look for is a fact now here's
now we talk about detection okay so so
we talked about effect we talked about a
hum gar
think about us so we're gonna talk about
first and then a hum car so effect is
the display of emotion so I do this a
lot on stream where you know I'll point
out to people that they're like smiling
and then like who was it who's a Dyer
was a dyrus I think you know a week ago
we had a stream with tires which was
really fantastic and he told this story
news laughing he was like yeah I was
playing baseball and I was scared of the
ball and my dad threw the ball at me and
it hit me in the eye and he's like oh so
funny I got hit too like my dad threw a
baseball and it hit me in the eye and he
was laughing you know like that's and I
was like dude that's weird man like why
are you laughing like that's not funny
man so someone so a fact is the emotion
that you see in someone's face and
sometimes it's diskin groom n't okay
and what I mean by dis congruent is it's
not like it's it doesn't match with like
what they're saying so a dis congruent
effect is a sign that there's something
weird going on in someone's like head so
if they're like laughing about something
that that really terrible happened to
them or another good example is like you
know when we talked to xqc or polka mein
about like you know what it feels like
to be successful and we asked them in
like they don't feel successful at all
they feel like failures that's another
example of a dis congruent effect
because you would expect that someone
who is accomplished so much should feel
good about themselves but they don't
feel good about themselves they like
beat themselves up further and they like
don't let themselves sit with that idea
and all that kind of good stuff
so you can have a disc and ruin effect
where someone should be happy and
they're not happy or you could have a
disc including effect where someone
should be crying and instead what
they're doing is laughing because humor
is a defense mechanism
oh so that's just explaining what effect
is does that make sense I got to check
in with chat again
that make sense
yeah okay No so there there's my point
is that the expressions on someone's
face give you a clue as to what's going
on on the inside and sometimes what they
show in their face doesn't match up with
what they should they should be showing
and that's what a diss congruent effect
is
okay I know I need to get a second
monitor I just don't probably doing that
time to settle I know I don't know
second monitor Kovan okay so let's talk
let's go back to Lyme so how do we use
effect in terms of lines so the main
thing here to watch out for is like if
you say something look for an effective
change so ignore the words that come out
of their mouth because like Liars like
the instrument that they use to control
you is words right that's literally what
lying is it is speaking words that are
false so the way to detect someone is
lying is not to pay attention to their
words and in fact it's to completely
ignore their words and pay attention to
their face right so like look at what
happens like if I say hey wait where
were you today oh I was nowhere no what
what no I was nowhere and like that
should not elicit an effective response
right like that doesn't that shouldn't
elicit any kind of effect it's like
we're like where were you what were you
up to and then if they have an effective
response to that that's kind of like a
clue
and then as you talk to them you know
try to think a little bit about like if
you're talking to them like notice
what's going on with their affic like
there may be times where they should be
displaying more effect like they should
feel offended or whatever and like
they're like stone-cold even or like
they should be like you're asking an
innocent question and they have an
effective response hi come back okay hi
let's go eat
go eat Milos no okay hi darlings okay
okay okay so all right so the
interesting thing this one doesn't know
how to lie the other one is a very good
liar dude she's like so good at lying
okay did you have fun today we're
talking about lying do you know lying is
what's lying
you
I perfect say that way forever okay so
let's keep going so the the second thing
is like don't pay attention to their
words pay attention to their their
effects so what they display on their
face and especially like dis congruent
an effect and this can be tough because
if you you know if you're concerned that
someone is lying it's completely
reasonable for them to be trying to calm
with it because they're like trying to
remain calm and it's perfectly
reasonable for them to be angry so it's
not like you know wandered one or either
of those things is gonna be sufficient
Oh sounds like someone's crying okay
let's go let's go drop you off can I go
drop you up let's go see why your event
is chronic and then daddy will finish
this lecture okay okay can you guys hear
that the crying in the background
all right so back to the lecture so pay
attention to their face and pay
attention to their emotional response
and you can't you know it's not like a
smoking gun but it's gonna sort of like
clue you in it's not gonna like you
don't want to get diverted by their
words and then you know the second thing
to think about is their ego so a hump
car is the son script word for ego and
oftentimes ego can be a sign of it's a
protective mechanism and it can be like
a sign of you know kind of impending
danger and so if someone's ego becomes
like pretty active and how can I explain
how what that looks like yeah that's
actually so like if you see kind of like
if they go on the attack if you express
concerns like that's a sign of the ego
so like if they start to attack you in
some way if they start to like ask like
I don't ask you this kind of stuff like
why are you asking me
they make comparisons and they go on the
attack so those are the two things that
you want to look out for in terms of
activity of ego
okay so they go on the offensive
or they make comparisons
and and so you have to watch out for
these two things I mean the really
tricky thing about this is that this
doesn't necessarily mean that they're
lying like they could just be hurt so
the tricky thing about this is like if
they're hurt like if you say something
and they feel hurt that can that can
activate the ego or they can feel like
fear that you're gonna catch them and
that can activate the ego so neither of
these is a smoking gun okay
and then the last thing to kind of think
about is actually your gut okay so I
think at the end of the day most human
beings are pretty good so you do all
this stuff right like see you figure out
who they like high likelihood low
likelihood you pay a tech to their pay
attention to their affect and especially
about whether it's congruent or diss
congruent you kind of watch out for the
ego and at the end of the day like you
can't know whether someone is lying
right there's no way of knowing for sure
whether someone is lying and so what it
kind of comes down to is your gut and
what I ultimately the first thing that
you've got to figure out is like figure
out is my gut pretty good
right so like are you someone that
generally is accurate are you filled
with social anxiety and insecurity
because if you're filled with social
anxiety and insecurity like don't trust
your gut it's hard to not do that but
like stop and think about that or are
you like pretty good at judging people
and like like are you you know good like
is your gut like tuned well or is it
like out of out of tune and so
ultimately I mean I I think you should
you know go with your gut it doesn't
mean that you should you know break up
with someone because you think they're
cheating on you or something like that
or fire someone because you think
they're stealing I think you should use
your gut to kind of guide you and then
collect evidence because that's
ultimately what it comes down to so I'm
working with people who you know have
substance use disorders at the end of
the day I sort of have an internal sense
of whether I think this person is lying
or not lying but that's not what I base
any of my actions on right and this is
the last thing about lying that's really
really important to understand is it the
way that you should deal with lying
shouldn't be based on your feelings it
should be based on data or kind of
thinking through things so just because
I think someone is cheating on me is not
a sufficient reason to to break up with
them but if my God is pretty good in
their being kind of shady and then I
think it's reasonable to like for me to
actually try to collect evidence to see
if my gut is right or Islam or is like
worth it to have a conversation with
them about why I feel the way that I
feel and see if they can help me figure
out you know what's going on here like
why do I feel this way and and
ultimately like let your gut be the
guide for whether you collect evidence
or don't collect evidence think about
whether this person has a high
likelihood or low likelihood of Lyme to
you and then like use you know effect
and a hump garlotte pay attention to
their ego and pay attention to their
face to try to deduce like what you
think is going on and then once your gut
sort of once you calculate all those
kind of variables and you have like okay
this like either I'm going to be assured
or I'm not going to be assured then if
your so let me write this out okay okay
so here's here's the final thing okay
alright so
okay so high consequence
versus low consequence
and then let's call it concept
avoided
says consequence
embracing okay
so a combination of this
these two gives you their two likelihood
right so that plus dis congruent effect
so what disk and ruin effect means or
congruent effect
plus I ego response or low ego response
okay and that ends up with your god
that has a high suspicion
missed all that forward or low suspicion
okay and then what happens is you've got
two choices so you can investigate which
I think is reasonable okay or you can
converse and this is what you do right
so if if I don't cost that someone is is
being honest with me I'm going to drug
test them
right or initiative paranoid you can
hire a private investigator if you're
concerned that someone's cheating on you
right you can you know talk to other
people I guess but that's not really a
great way or you can converse and then
like you have you know you kind of talk
about and what you do when you converse
is like create a safe space
right you kind of talk about trust and
then we kind of go back to like this
stop over here so this is the point of
conversing it's to handle this
and then hopefully at the end of it what
you're going to end up with is as being
you know the goal here is to like do all
this crap and then end up being
reassured or to have honesty
and that's really the goal and this is
this is how you deal with liars or
people hurt and this is how you deal
with concerns that people are aligned
okay questions thoughts okay so look
okay so now we have a question here I've
been a pathological liar my whole life
and I realize that I'm all alone and
don't have anyone I can call real
friends or family this causes me a lot
of distress I've lied to anyone that
I've crossed paths with even those who
are close to me telling the truth now
would be devastating as it would end my
relationships with everyone I know what
advice do you have for pathological
liars who want to change so I want you
guys to pay attention to this okay so
we're gonna do this this thing so now we
see why this person lies so we're gonna
do this we're gonna do this this we're
gonna do this and we're gonna do this
this do this do this so I want you
just look at this hey I've been a
pathological liar my whole life and I
realized oh Sh
I can't read this
[ __ ] around
good call copy
you
merge formatting keep text only yeah
it's it's still keeping it whatever okay
so I think this is the thing so I've
been a pathological liar my whole life
I've lied a blah blah blah this is the
problem sentence you guys ready for it
so now we see why this person lives
right Oh God
okay telling the truth now would be
devastating as it would end my
relationships with it everyone I know so
this is the reason this person lives
because this is a high consequence and
the person is consequence avoidant and
this is how a pathological liar is born
you guys see that like does that make
sense
this is exactly what a pathological liar
is it's someone who has to control the
opinions of other people around him or
her and if we think a little bit about
like how does this person move forward
so it starts with those two things right
it starts with being less conflict I
mean consequence avoiding it comes with
being consequence embracing and for you
to recognize that you've got two options
in life one is that you can continue
living a lie and at some point it's
going to come crumbling down because it
comes crumbling down and secondly you
may not be as good of a liar as you
think you are most people may know that
you're kind of full of [ __ ] and they
just don't give a [ __ ] because they're
living their own lives and they don't
have time to waste on you and like
catching you out to be a liar or you can
start to build relationships and meet
new people with whom you're honest and
this is where now we get to some
interesting stuff okay so like let's
talk about lying about yourself so if
you want to conquer lying if you're
alive and just think about this because
lying is about control right it's about
controlling your it's about controlling
other people's responses to you and
that's why pathological liar lies he
probably lies about his job he lies
about I'm assuming it's a dude but he
lies about his job he lies about his
relationships lies about all kinds of
things and it also becomes like random
like sometimes they just start lying
because they don't know what else to do
so if you want to conquer lying you have
to start by understanding what are you
lying to control right that's where you
start to overcome lying in your life and
in yourself like what are you trying to
control by telling this lie what is the
response you're hoping to create what is
the outcome that you're hoping to avoid
because lying is about avoidance of an
outcome and then when you dig into that
you're gonna find out what is it that I
care about why is it important that
people view me in this
way and if you're lying about it you
care about it in some way so most gamers
lie out of fear of a particular
consequence and they strive to control
other people's reactions to them right
so like parents taking my games away
continuing to get financial support by
lying about your school performance
that's something that I did to my
parents lying to an essay at significant
other about like how much you play games
to keep them in the relationship and
eventually what you're gonna figure out
is that like you're trying to prevent a
particular outcome and that particular
outcome is a fear right you have a fear
that your your significant other is
gonna leave you you have a fear that
you're gonna drop out of college you
have a fear that you're going to like
you know be laughed at by your friends
or never invited to another another
party and chances are for most of you
guys if it's if you're like me it's the
fear of being like a [ __ ] up and a be
like being behind in like it's like
being nowhere in life but the thing is
if you're a pathological liar and you're
lying to everyone you actually are
behind in life you are a [ __ ] you're
already a [ __ ] but what you're afraid
of is everyone knowing that you're a
[ __ ] but it's already true and so if
you want to stop lying what you have to
do is like face the fear that you're
trying to control that's what it comes
down to and like the really this is this
is where it gets kind of really sad is
because you believe that about yourself
right like it's not even a fear in your
mind you're afraid that other people are
gonna know it but you believe that if
you show them the honest version of
yourself they're going to reject just
think about that for a second what when
when someone's a pathological liar the
thing that they actually fear the most
is already true in their mind because
they think that they're a [ __ ] you've
accepted that in your life you are a
[ __ ] and you're never going to amount
to anything and then you just have to
lie to keep people from realizing it and
that's a really really really really
problematic way to look at yourself
because you just can't win there right
like there's no amount of lying that's
gonna cover up for the fact that you're
a [ __ ] and and this is vital because
what you're afraid of is already
happening and you're just trying to hide
it your worst fear is actually true and
this is the really important thing
because hiding it doesn't actually help
because the problem is already there
right so like all hiding does is
actually propagate the problem and so
what you need to do is change that
belief about yourself that you are
messed up that you are behind and that
you need to be ashamed of yourself and
the really really sad thing is that the
people who you're afraid that they're
going to abandon you when you tell them
the truth those are actually the people
that are the most likely to help you
actually make a change if I feel like
I'm worthless in life and I don't want
anyone to know look let's say I don't
want my older brother to know where I
don't want my parents to know I don't
want my friends to know and then what
happens is I propagate this lie and I
don't actually like get any better right
but what instead what I need to do if I
actually want to change on the inside I
need those people's help
and so when you lie to other people and
you don't tell them what's going on with
you you're propagating a fantasy while
maintaining a reality that is like the
very thing that you fear and you're also
cutting out the people who can actually
help you make a change in your life just
think about this if you think that
you're a nothing in life and you go to
someone like let's say you go to your
best friend and you say hey man I've
been lying to you for years I remember a
friend of mine did this came to me one
day and he said I actually like lie and
I never gradual like we were in college
together and he came to me a couple
years later and he's like I lied I never
graduated like I just dropped out of
school and I pretended to go to school
and in that moment he was looking for
rejection right he was like man [ __ ] you
but like I'm gonna say that I'm like man
dude that sucks
why I barely passed you know like how
are you doing with that man like it
sounds like you like those are the
people that you actually need to accept
and then once those people accept you
like once you once they see you for all
the piece of crap that you are worthless
and all this kind of stuff and then they
don't run away then this part inside it
starts to change right this part starts
to change and you're like oh wait a
minute like maybe I'm not messed up
because these people are accepting me
for who I am maybe I like maybe I'm
actually an okay person and so you have
to face your fear in order to overcome
it and you have to acknowledge where you
are in order to go where you want so
when you
lie to other people you deny where you
are and this is why you're stuck because
it's like you're like you're it's like
you're trying to navigate on a map and
and like you're not telling the GPS like
where your real location it's like how
the [ __ ] are you gonna go anywhere if
the GPS doesn't know where you are like
you have to start by like with from
where you are and it's like it's a
really sad scenario like why is everyone
saying all before I'm confused okay
anyway so that's what I think is going
on so like at the end of the day anyway
I was ranting for a while that expense
okay what if they were then they reject
man and like this is the cool thing if
they reject right if they reject you
then then what then you wake up the next
day and you like take a dump and you
make yourself a cup of coffee and like
life goes on right like this is the
thing is like people's rejection like I
know it hurts but your life doesn't come
to a grinding halt like I think the
world would be a far better place and
and like the people like our audience
would be so much better off if they
realize that rejection does not destroy
like this is the big thing that I
learned right like this is why I'm such
a big fan of failure like when you know
getting 8090 hundred rejections from med
schools and plastering up on my like I
wish I I wish I'd kept those and then
like when I got into med school I
remember there's this one day okay story
time you guys want story time okay so
you know I had been rejected what a lot
a lot a lot and then like I realized
okay I got into med school and I was
happy and I realized like like I looked
into the chasm of absolute failure and
then I had jumped in and I had wall
around in the dark for a little while
and then I'd crawled out and then I
remember there was this one day where
where's we were on surgery and sometimes
people you know surgeons can be mean to
medical students happens so we were I
was doing vascular surgery and we were
doing something called a carotid and our
direct
me and what a carotid endarterectomy is
you have two carotid arteries that you
know basically carry blood from your
heart to your brain there are the two
biggest forms of circulation you also
have them for t-bone artery in the back
but so a carotid endarterectomy is
sometimes these get clogged with like
plaque and like you know from eating
unhealthy and stuff like that and then
they narrow and then you don't have
enough blood flow going to the brain and
if they get super super small once they
get around 70% clogged then you have to
actually go in and like take them out
like you have to take out all that crud
and you have to reopen the artery okay
so we were doing this operation on
someone we were like you know so there's
like a vascular surgeon who's like you
know we've got the dude's neck opened up
and he's like trying to repair it or on
an artery or whatever and then you know
the field of view for a carotid artery
which means like the actual space that
you're operating in is like tiny like
you have this part of the neck opened up
right so it's maybe like like two inches
across it and maximum and okay I don't
know what's okay I don't know what
people are talking about here I'm just
gonna keep telling my story so the
surgeons operating there and I'm not
really doing a whole lot because I'm a
medical student you can't you know it's
like you have to really be precise and
if I Nick the wrong thing the dude could
have a stroke and die so I'm not doing
any of that so I'm just kind of there
and I'm watching he's on one side of the
table and I'm on the other side of the
table I'm basically holding something
called a retractor which is like I'm
holding the skin open so that he can
operate and then he Nick's something
okay this is the blood starts working
and then it fills up because it's a tiny
space right so it only takes like maybe
five millimeters of blood to like fill
up the space that you can't see the
artery in and he's like looking for
where he nicked it and then so it's a
stressful situation and like he's on one
side of the table and I'm on the other
side of the table so we get a suction
and we suction out the blood and for a
flash of a second before it fills up
again we have a clearer view and what do
I see on my side I see a spurting
fountain blood like I see exactly where
the Nick is and he can't see it he's
looking for it he suctions again he like
looks again and he's suctions but he's
on the wrong [ __ ] side of the table
because I like I can see cuz I'm on my
estate so B being dumb
you know I say excuse me dr. so-and-so I
think I done the the Nick is here it's
on this side and then what does he say
he says the med student when I want your
opinion I will ask for it and I was like
dude are you [ __ ] kidding me and like
I'm like the guy's gonna have a stroke
and you can't find where the nicked
artery is and it's like literally cuz
I'm on the other side of the table it's
not an opinion man the guy's blood is
spurting and he's like he's gonna die
you're not gonna die
gonna have a stroke and then so there
are two fellows with me and one of them
started cracking up a little bit but and
then so anyway the artery got repaired
cuz at the end of the day the surgeon
listen to what I had to say and and you
know like that kind of [ __ ] happens all
the time and usually like med students
get like hurt by it right they're like
oh I tried to help in the surgeon yelled
at me and he like I didn't know the
answer to the question then they yelled
at me and they hurt my feelings oh my
god that's like dude it doesn't matter
like I don't think you guys understand
like this is the the main thing med
students have never failed anything in
life so they don't understand like
failure doesn't destroy you in fact you
just wake up the next day and then it's
like bog dump time and then you take a
dump and you move on with your life and
you're still there and you survived and
then like you know someone rejects you
and then you're like okay so I guess
they're not my friends anymore and then
you're like okay well maybe next time
what I should do is try to lie a little
bit less and then you meet another
person and then you know you play games
with them for a while and you ask them
to hang out and they say what do you do
in life and then you say okay I'm a you
usually lie about being a you know
professional poker player or trader or
whatever you're like yeah I'm just
trying to figure it out you just say
those words and then something magical
happens so anyway I'm gonna go back so
like anyway I saw the Nick right and I
saw where it wasn't the dude ended up
fine and so like this is the thing and
like a lot of medical students get bent
out of shape over that sort of thing
when they get yelled at in the or
because they don't know the answer the
question or whatever like it's just to
the surgeons an [ __ ] it's like you're
not doing anything wrong and even if you
are doing something wrong with you
medic-2 student like you're here to do
things wrong I don't think people get
that right students are expected to make
mistakes and if you're like living life
if you're a gamer like you're expected
to make mistakes man like the real world
is not like your video game so you're
gonna make mistakes like that's okay bro
like just learn and get rejected by
someone and then on mobile with seven
okay I'm gonna keep going I'm just gonna
keep talking okay so like this is the
thing when you get rejected like the
next time around you meet someone and
then like you're a little bit more
honest with them and when you tell them
when they're like hey what are you doing
instead of saying yeah I'm an attorney
at so-and-so law firm which is a
complete lie you're just like yeah man
I'm trying to figure it out and then
something magical is gonna happen
because then they're gonna say yeah man
me too
and then you guys are gonna like you
know y'all are gonna like be like yeah
there's gonna be like a virtual fist
bump where where you're meeting them
halfway and you guys are both trying to
figure in huh and then it's like cool
and then one day you guys can actually
have a conversation about it right
because if you're the attorney in your
mind and he thinks you're the attorney
and then he like asks you for advice and
then you feel good about yourself
because you're giving him false advice
because you don't know what the [ __ ]
you're talking about instead what
happens is you guys can be like
authentic about it you can be like hey
man like I'm trying to figure this stuff
out like what are you doing put your
life together he's like dude I'm playing
a lot of video games and he's like
you're like yeah I'm and me too like
what do you think man should we do
something about that look let's try to
figure that out like how about I work on
my resume you work on your resume and we
send it to each other in a week and I'm
like after we send each other resumes we
like queue up for valor and and dota or
whatever and we play some games and like
that's that's how you move forward but
as long as you're lying you're not like
moving forward like you can't do that
right
anyway questions thoughts that enough
about lying in storytime and all that
good stuff and playing some dota what
are we doing